Next up in the world of functions we
are going to learn about scopes.
This is fun topic and too much theory
in this topic will make sure
that you are absolutely confused.
We are not going to do that
with just a simple example
and moving after the example,
we'll just write the code.
The code will make all
the doubts absolutely clear.
And that is the difference between
people who teach theory
too much and people who have
worked in the production.
They like to show you the code first.
And I'm a guy who have
always been into the production
for as long as I remember.
So I'll just show you the code
and you will love this one.
For this one, all I
need is two things.
The first of all, your
undivided attention and focus
on the screen itself.
I'll remove myself from here so that
we can focus just on the screen.
The second one is please do rate
this course as well.
I know I've said it many
times but you know, a lot
of people doesn't rate and this
is not really great.
So don't worry, I'm just here,
I'm just trying to make sure that
you focus on the screen more.
So we'll just go on that part.
So what are these scopes and what
does it even mean to have
something in the scope itself?
So this is pretty, fun.
Let's take the example.
Imagine you are running
a bustling chai cafe.
It's called as, let's just give
it a name as well for fun.
Let's call this one as Global Sip.
So this is your cafe name.
Pretty fun name.
And each team member has their
own notepad for the order.
So let's just say we are modern,
we have the apps for, for orders.
So we have one app which is
with the team and there is
another one which is required
by the owner as well.
So this is owner, owner.
And this owner has an app.
And again this app, let's
just say this, we call this
one as Master Notepad.
So this is Master Notepad.
This is the app which is owned
by the owner and he's responsible
for placing all the orders
in the kitchen itself.
But the team also got
their own notepad as well.
And each one of the team member
will have their own notepad.
Maybe we have two
workers in the cafe.
This one has its own notepad
and this one has its own notepad.
So this is run and this
is also there.
So this team member one which
gets a notepad and this one also
gets a notepad, another one.
Now if the kitchen guy writes
down, let's just say two masala chai
in his own notepad, this guy.
It doesn't change your master order.
So whatever is written here,
it doesn't change it there.
Although these are called as
notepad, this is also notepad.
Let's just say this is not master
But taking an order here
doesn't change this.
This has right now no
relation with this guy.
So again, let's just say
for the fun stuff, let's
call this one as notepad.
Why to call it Master Notepad.
This can also be just
a notepad and this is fine,
this is absolutely fair.
So I hope you get this.
Why the global scope and local
scope whole thing actually comes
up in the world of thing.
And this has a name itself,
we call it as scope, but there
is another name for it
and this is called as scopes.
Surely that's the one.
And this is known as name resolution.
The word whole name resolution means
which one should I resolve to?
Is this notepad I'm talking about?
Is this notepad I'm talking about or
is this notepad I'm talking about?
In the world of Python we have
a whole lot of ranges
and names and all these things.
So first of all the scope that you're
going to study is known as local.
This is called as inside a function.
This is a very common one.
So this is the first one
we are going to study.
We will have a lot
of examples of this one.
Then we have enclosing and yes
we are going to study.
This is actually from outer
function, if nested and yes there
could be nested functions as well.
So if this is nested, so this
is local, this is enclosing.
But we have another one.
Yes we do have.
This is known as global.
So this is like a master notepad,
but this is like global.
We call this as top level,
script or sometimes module,
whichever makes sense.
And also we have another one,
this is the final one,
don't worry on that part.
This is called as built in.
So there are some built in things
which are reserved like the print.
I cannot use the method name print.
But yes, there are many of such
these scopes and name resolutions.
So let's go through them one by one.
Again the first one is local,
the second one is enclosing or
from the outer one.
We'll study about that as
well, don't you worry.
And then we have the global
one and then we have the built
in one, or rather it
would be said not built in.
Built in.
That's correct.
So I think it's enough.
That's all what we
are going to study.
Let's go ahead and now
write some code.
Coding always gives more
positive response.
So let's call this
one as new function.
We are into the 06 file and call
this one as scopes py good stuff.
I'll shut up my AI as well so
that it doesn't bother us.
So let's just say in this very
first example we have a simple
mechanism of serve chai.
That's good enough.
And this is our method name.
Let's go like that.
In this I go ahead and declare
a variable that says chai type.
And there could be a variety of chai.
Let's just say this
one is Masala chai.
All right, make sure
that you understand.
I can write the comments like this.
This is known as local scope.
Local scope simply means
the validation of this variable
is just inside this method.
So I can just go ahead
and use it like this.
I can say formatted string
and I can call this one as inside
function and then just
use this variable name.
This is chai type.
This is completely valid.
But what if there could be
a case that you have declared this
chai type here as well?
And you call that hey, I will prefer
lemon, which is my favorite one.
And I call this serve chai.
So what do you think this print
method is going to refer to?
Is it going to refer to this
chai type or is it going
to refer to this chai type?
And again on top of that, if I write
the same method again here or
the same print statement here with
the formatted string and I'll call
this one as outside format function.
And then we're going
to again say chai type.
Pretty good.
This is definitely confusing
and you'll see this quite a lot.
One thing you have to remember,
whenever you have created a variable
inside a function, the scope
of it is just within
the function, never outside of it.
So all the people who are outside
of this function,
maybe another function don't
know what you have done it.
This is like you have
worked inside your home.
So anytime this outside function
tries to refer to chai type, it will
refer to something which is outside
only it cannot refer to inside here.
And we'll see that in action.
Now let's go ahead and run this,
we'll go ahead and say, hey python,
let's run this 06 file and you
can see inside the function there
is masala outside the function.
It's level.
But what if I go ahead
and don't have this chai type?
Notice here immediately we have
an error that I don't know
what you're talking about.
I have zero idea what this
chai type actually is.
So you have to provide a scope
for which it can access.
It can reach out.
And I can only reach out because
I am declared an outside file or.
Or in the global scope.
Yeah, this whole file
is a global one.
Here it works like that.
And as I mentioned, the scope
local inside the function.
This is exactly what it means.
If you have declared something
inside the function, it's only
accessible inside the function
the moment you move it outside.
It's not fun.
It's not available.
Let's also go ahead and talk
about the nested function as well.
We can create it here.
No need to create too many files.
I'll now restrict myself
from creating too many files.
But we'll still write a lot of code.
Let's just say we have
an example of chai counter.
Pretty solid examples
related to all the chai.
And let's just say we
have a chai order.
The chai order for us
this time is Lemon.
Lemon, I can write that.
And this one, we call this one as
enclosing, scope Scope.
So that means the scope that
where this chai order is
available within the function.
That's the whole meaning
of enclosing scope.
Now let's just say further
down we have another function
designed in this function.
This is interesting one,
we call this as chiorder again.
And in this I want to say, hey, my
chiorder again function inside
a function is going to be Ginger.
Ginger.
And then I go ahead and print this.
So let's just say I have a print
statement and I go ahead and say
inner just to make sure that
you understand that we are talking
about this chorder chiorder.
So we have two chi order and just
with the color contrast
you can imagine, yes, we are
still inside this function
and we are talking about this.
Only now the moment I go
outside of this, this is
where people get confused.
The moment I have returned
this one here, indentation level,
that means I'm outside.
Now the outer function that
we are talking about.
So I can just go ahead and say outer
just like this, put up a comma
and then we have a chai order.
Notice here, the color contrast.
So the line number 16 Chai order
is referring to this chai.
The scope of this print order
is just here, nowhere outside.
And I can just go ahead
and print this as well.
I can come here outside of this
and I can say, hey, I run this
print order function just like this.
So I am declaring a function
inside a function as well as I am
calling this function
from within the function.
I know a lot is happening, but if
you truly look at this and take
a moment, pause the video here, you
will understand it's not that big.
We have an outer function
within this, we have this
small function inside it.
We declared some variable, the scope
is within the function itself.
And I've called this here super easy.
Now same thing can
happen outside as well.
Let's just say here I have no
idea about that function.
I can just go ahead and have
my all variable chai order.
And let's just say this time we
are looking for the Tulsi chai.
This is actually in the global scope.
Now global global scope.
And here I can have chi counter,
being called again.
There we go.
We execute everything that's
inside that and further at the very
end of it we print something
like this, global, I can write that
global colon and then we
can simply say chai order.
So I hope you can see this, we
are using the same variable.
And again the common question
is why would anybody
use the same variable name?
It's too common.
It's actually too common.
But I hope you get that
how the functioning
and how the reachability
of the function works.
So let's go ahead and run this again.
So, so notice here the inner
one is still ginger.
It's not getting overridden.
The inner one still is ginger,
outside that the outer one is lemon.
So this is outer what we have
within the function and the final,
the global one is tulsi.
Is there no way that these
can actually hinder?
Yes, there is no way that they
can actually hinder each other.
Each function is a scoped one.
Let's draw a diagram on this one.
So let's just say this is
whole, your global scope.
And we are going to call this
one as global globe global.
And this is your global
file level access.
And inside this file you
can have many functions.
We have this function,
we have this function.
And just for representation we
can have the smaller ones.
So we have many functions
and each function is represented
like a house itself.
Whatever you do inside the house,
remain inside the house
the moment you go outside of it.
Surely you can access all
the things which are global, but you
cannot access what's happening
inside each of the house.
That is all yes.
There are ways how we can
access each of these.
Like, if I want to access the global
one, there is a way, There
is a mechanism for doing it.
But right now, let's not do
that in the same video.
Otherwise we're going
to lose the context of this one.
I hope it was fun for you.
It was definitely fun for you.
Fun for me, actually.
And, don't forget to rate, and let's
catch up in the next video.